jax/experimental/README.md, before:

## Mini-libraries

JAX provides some small, experimental libraries for machine learning. These
libraries are in part about providing tools and in part about serving as
examples for how to build such libraries using JAX. Each one is only a few
hundred lines of code, so take a look inside and adapt them as you need!

### Neural-net building with Stax

**Stax** is a functional neural network building library. The basic idea is that
a single layer or an entire network can be modeled as an `(init_fun, apply_fun)`
pair. The `init_fun` is used to initialize network parameters and the
`apply_fun` takes parameters and inputs to produce outputs. There are
constructor functions for common basic pairs, like `Conv` and `Relu`, and these
pairs can be composed in series using `stax.serial` or in parallel using
`stax.parallel`.

Here’s an example:

```python
import jax.numpy as np
from jax import random
from jax.experimental import stax
from jax.experimental.stax import Conv, Dense, MaxPool, Relu, Flatten, LogSoftmax

# Use stax to set up network initialization and evaluation functions
net_init, net_apply = stax.serial(
    Conv(32, (3, 3), padding='SAME'), Relu,
    Conv(64, (3, 3), padding='SAME'), Relu,
    MaxPool((2, 2)), Flatten,
    Dense(128), Relu,
    Dense(10), LogSoftmax,
)

# Initialize parameters, not committing to a batch shape
rng = random.PRNGKey(0)
in_shape = (-1, 28, 28, 1)
out_shape, net_params = net_init(rng, in_shape)

# Apply network to dummy inputs
inputs = np.zeros((128, 28, 28, 1))
predictions = net_apply(net_params, inputs)
```

### First-order optimization

JAX has a minimal optimization library focused on stochastic first-order
optimizers. Every optimizer is modeled as an `(init_fun, update_fun,
get_params)` triple of functions. The `init_fun` is used to initialize the
optimizer state, which could include things like momentum variables, and the
`update_fun` accepts a gradient and an optimizer state to produce a new
optimizer state. The `get_params` function extracts the current iterate (i.e.
the current parameters) from the optimizer state. The parameters being optimized
can be ndarrays or arbitrarily-nested list/tuple/dict structures, so you can
store your parameters however you’d like.

Here’s an example, using `jit` to compile the whole update end-to-end:

```python
from jax.experimental import optimizers
from jax import jit, grad

# Define a simple squared-error loss
def loss(params, batch):
  inputs, targets = batch
  predictions = net_apply(params, inputs)
  return np.sum((predictions - targets)**2)

# Use optimizers to set optimizer initialization and update functions
opt_init, opt_update, get_params = optimizers.momentum(step_size=1e-3, mass=0.9)

# Define a compiled update step
@jit
def step(i, opt_state, batch):
  params = get_params(opt_state)
  g = grad(loss)(params, batch)
  return opt_update(i, g, opt_state)

# Dummy input data stream
data_generator = ((np.zeros((128, 28, 28, 1)), np.zeros((128, 10)))
                  for _ in range(10))

# Optimize parameters in a loop
opt_state = opt_init(net_params)
for i in range(10):
  opt_state = step(i, opt_state, next(data_generator))
net_params = get_params(opt_state)
```

Commit message:

Updated README wrt. new features for Stax.

jax/experimental/README.md, after:

## Mini-libraries

JAX provides some small, experimental libraries for machine learning. These
libraries are in part about providing tools and in part about serving as
examples for how to build such libraries using JAX. Each one is only a few
hundred lines of code, so take a look inside and adapt them as you need!

#### 👉 **Note**: These mini-libraries are meant to be an _inspiration_, but not a prescription. 

To serve that purpose, it is best to keep their code samples minimal; so we generally *will not merge PRs* adding new features. Instead, please send your lovely pull requests and design ideas to more fully-featured libraries like [DeepMind's Haiku](https://github.com/deepmind/dm-haiku) and Google Research's [FLAX](https://github.com/google/flax) or [Trax](https://github.com/google/trax)."

### Neural-net building with Stax

**Stax** is a functional neural network building library. The basic idea is that
a single layer or an entire network can be modeled as an `(init_fun, apply_fun)`
pair. The `init_fun` is used to initialize network parameters and the
`apply_fun` takes parameters and inputs to produce outputs. There are
constructor functions for common basic pairs, like `Conv` and `Relu`, and these
pairs can be composed in series using `stax.serial` or in parallel using
`stax.parallel`.

Here’s an example:

```python
import jax.numpy as np
from jax import random
from jax.experimental import stax
from jax.experimental.stax import Conv, Dense, MaxPool, Relu, Flatten, LogSoftmax

# Use stax to set up network initialization and evaluation functions
net_init, net_apply = stax.serial(
    Conv(32, (3, 3), padding='SAME'), Relu,
    Conv(64, (3, 3), padding='SAME'), Relu,
    MaxPool((2, 2)), Flatten,
    Dense(128), Relu,
    Dense(10), LogSoftmax,
)

# Initialize parameters, not committing to a batch shape
rng = random.PRNGKey(0)
in_shape = (-1, 28, 28, 1)
out_shape, net_params = net_init(rng, in_shape)

# Apply network to dummy inputs
inputs = np.zeros((128, 28, 28, 1))
predictions = net_apply(net_params, inputs)
```

### First-order optimization

JAX has a minimal optimization library focused on stochastic first-order
optimizers. Every optimizer is modeled as an `(init_fun, update_fun,
get_params)` triple of functions. The `init_fun` is used to initialize the
optimizer state, which could include things like momentum variables, and the
`update_fun` accepts a gradient and an optimizer state to produce a new
optimizer state. The `get_params` function extracts the current iterate (i.e.
the current parameters) from the optimizer state. The parameters being optimized
can be ndarrays or arbitrarily-nested list/tuple/dict structures, so you can
store your parameters however you’d like.

Here’s an example, using `jit` to compile the whole update end-to-end:

```python
from jax.experimental import optimizers
from jax import jit, grad

# Define a simple squared-error loss
def loss(params, batch):
  inputs, targets = batch
  predictions = net_apply(params, inputs)
  return np.sum((predictions - targets)**2)

# Use optimizers to set optimizer initialization and update functions
opt_init, opt_update, get_params = optimizers.momentum(step_size=1e-3, mass=0.9)

# Define a compiled update step
@jit
def step(i, opt_state, batch):
  params = get_params(opt_state)
  g = grad(loss)(params, batch)
  return opt_update(i, g, opt_state)

# Dummy input data stream
data_generator = ((np.zeros((128, 28, 28, 1)), np.zeros((128, 10)))
                  for _ in range(10))

# Optimize parameters in a loop
opt_state = opt_init(net_params)
for i in range(10):
  opt_state = step(i, opt_state, next(data_generator))
net_params = get_params(opt_state)
```
